What the author would like to do today is talk about one of his favorite subjects, and that is the neuroscience of sleep.

Now, there is a sound, a sound that is desperately, desperately familiar to most people, and of course it is the sound of the alarm clock. And what that truly ghastly, awful sound does is stop the single most important behavioral experience that people have, and that's sleep. If people are an average sort of person, 36 percent of their life will be spent asleep, which means that if they live to 90, then 32 years will have been spent entirely asleep.

Now what that 32 years is telling people is that sleep at some level is important. And yet, for most of the people don't give sleep a second thought. People throw it away. really just don't think about sleep. And so what I'd like to do today is change your views, change your ideas and your thoughts about sleep. And the journey that I want to take you on, we need to start by going back in time.


The point the author  is trying to make is that when people are asleep, this thing does not shut down. 
In fact, some areas of the brain are actually more active during the sleep state than during the wake state. The other thing that is really important about sleep is that it does not arise from a single structure within the brain, but is to some extent a network property, and if people flip the brain on its back, this bit here is the hypothalamus, and right under there is a whole raft of interesting structures, not least the biological clock. The biological clock tells people when it's good to be up, when it's good to be asleep, and what that structure does is interact with a whole raft of other areas within the hypothalamus, the lateral hypothalamus, the ventrolateral preoptic nuclei. The brain stem then projects forward and bathes the cortex, this wonderfully wrinkly bit over here, with neurotransmitters that keep people awake and essentially provide them with their consciousness.  So sleep arises from a whole raft of different interactions within the brain, and essentially, sleep is turned on and off as a result of a range of interactions in here.So sleep arises from a whole raft of different interactions within the brain, and essentially, sleep is turned on and off as a result of a range of interactions in here.